---
title: "What's a Fusor?"
date: 2023-07-02T13:31:36+02:00
draft: true
series: "fusor"
---


One of the coolest physics devices within reach of the amateur at home is the _Farnsworth-Hirsch fusor_, a "star in a bottle". It invokes strong electric forces onto the building blocks of matter to smash them together so hard, they combine into different elements and useful particles: the modern realization of the alchemists' dream of transmutation. Unlike huge fusion reactors such as a doughnut-shaped massive [tokamak](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tokamak) or a sleekly twisted [stellerator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stellarator), they are roughly spherical, quite small, don't cost billions of dollars, and do not aim to solve any energy crisis. Instead they strife towards very tight controlled fusion for research and potential medical applications.

Very extreme conditions are needed to reach the enormous speeds and forces required for nuclear fusion. Outside laboratories fusion typically happens at the center of stars like the Sun, or later when they die or their dead remnants collide, and at similarly extreme conditions such as the beginning of time. Temperature, pressure and collision forces in those events are beyond the imagination of most humans, many _many_ times hotter, denser and stronger than anything most have ever witnessed. For example, the [solar core](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solar_core) has a temperature of around 15,000,000 °C (that's 27,000,000 °Freedom units) at almost seven times the density of osmium (the densest material in Earth), and all that with a pressure of over 250 billion atmospheres. Yet solar fusion is so slow as to only create the same power output as a few light bulbs per cubic meter. It may sound insane and wrong, but **a mere human produces more heat per volume than our Sun**, and the power per mass is even much more in favour of those bioreactors. The massive energy production of our star only results due to its enormous size.

There are multiple attempts to recreate nuclear fusion on Earth, usually seen as an almost unlimited power source. Using [deuterium](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deuterium), [tritium](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tritium) or [helium-3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Helium-3) instead of the ordinary hydrogen of the Sun is a must because only those increase the output per volume to a reasonable range. To achieve sustainable efficient fusion reactors is an enormous engineering task humanity has yet to conquer despite mulriple recent start-ups attempting to get there within the next decades. Consequently, the only feasible way to fuse atoms at home is in very small amounts. There is absolutely no way to achieve the energies of stars or even the smallest professional research reactor oneself. For comparison, the fusion of four quadrillion deuterium atoms is about the same energy as burning a match, while even a good fusor would have barely reached this total number if it ran since the extinction of the dinosaurs.

The very low power output does not mean that the task of building a fusor is trivial or pointless. Not at all, it involves very high voltages to accelerate ionized atoms to the required speeds. Yet that is for nothing if they just hit some air particle almost immediately and are bounced off course. Hence a high vacuum, free of pesky other things, is necessary. Also only certain rare materials actually work and need be acquired somehow, for example by [electrolysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrolysis) of [heavy water](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heavy_water). Dangers for the public or neighbours are effectively non-existent, but for the researcher directly besides the running thing they are significant. Despite the bad publicity of anything 'nuclear', the true dangers lie elsewhere. High voltage in particular can kill before one has any chance to notice. Meanwhile any produced radiation is so weak to be irrelevant more than a few meters away, even without shielding. Even close-up the only potentially hazardous radiations are ultra-violet light, which can damage skin and the eyes, and at high-powered fusors also x-rays; neither of which result from anything nuclear, but from plasma and high voltage itself.

Altogether, such a tiny fusion reactor is **a great way to learn a plethora of useful skills: physics, electric & vacuum engineering, material sciences, operational control, tinkering with all kinds of things, and much more**. A very notable downside are the significant costs: the required parts are rarely cheap and even if one is very minimalistic costs within several thousand Euros/Dollars should be expected unntil it finally works. The exact amount depends a lot on pore-existing materials, skill, and most importantly sponsors and supporting institutions. A student might be able to do this as a project or part of a thesis to get funding.

To stay within a sane budget and also within a DIY-mentality **one has to: improvise, search for cheap used parts, figure out what available parts might work, has to test and try**. Building scientific devices is sometimes a science in itself. It almost never is just sticking a few pre-made parts together and switchg it on.

I don't want to be a killjoy, but last but not least a **huge warning: building a fusor should only be attempted by those with significant knowledge around all its dangerous aspects, especially high voltage.** Mistakes with vacuum components are most often just very costly. Radiation dangers are only relevant late in the project and relatively easy to avoid as long as one knows about them and is careful. But the electricity is an entirely different beast. **This is not like your typical warning label: the required electricity is not just painful with a low chance for serious injury. Imagine touching your outlet; now this times a hundred; that is still barely there.**

I repeat one last time: **ACCIDENTAL ELECTROCUTION BY A FUSOR HAS A VERY HIGH CHANCE FOR INSTANT DEATH.**

If you are unsure whether you can safely build and operate a device dealing with such strong electricity, then you can not! In this case do not attempt it without a mentor or similar guidance. Not just basic help, but somebody who takes a close look at everything and keeps an eye on you all the time while electricity is flowing. Also familiarize yourself with all the basic and advanced rules of electric safety. I have also written [a page listing a bunch of important dangers & safety guidelines](), but it is _not_ meant to be exhaustive.